Nosebleed? Don't Panic!
Nosebleed or medically known as epistaxis, is an acute bleeding from the nostril or nasal cavity or even the back of the throat known as the nasopharynx area. This is a very common complaint as up to 60% of the population all have ever complained of nasal bleeding for at least once.

The cause of epistaxis is the rupture of the blood vessels in the nasal cavity. Generally, nosebleed can be divided into two type which are the anterior and the posterior. The differences of those two types are on which blood vessels that are ruptured, the clinical signs and symptoms also the management. On anterior nosebleed, it originates from the rich arterial anastomoses of the nasal septum known as Kiesselbach’s plexus whilst posterior nosebleed originates from the posterior branch of the sphenopalatine arteries.



Certain conditions that may cause nosebleed are:

	Local trauma, including the habit of nose picking, facial injury, septal deviation
	Foreign bodies insertion, the common cause of nosebleed in children. This condition also applies to the insertion of nasogastric tube or endotracheal tube.
	Dry climate and cold weather also increase the prevalence of nosebleed.
	Vascular malformation
	General condition that may impair with the clotting blood time, such as thrombocytopenia (low platelet counts), using anticoagulant drugs such as aspirin, non-steroidal anti inflammation drugs (NSAIDs). Furthermore, it is implicated that hypertension may correlate with nosebleed as recent researches show that cases of epistaxis are more common in hypertensive people.

The first thing that can be done in case of a nosebleed is grasp and pinch the nose for at least 10 minutes. Direct applied pressure will immediately cease the bleeding and this method usually works for the uncomplicated anterior nosebleed. If grasping and pinching the nose for up to 20 minutes do not stop the bleeding, it is suggested that you seek medical assistance nearby.

What will be done in the Emergency Department are that the patient will be given an examination to determine the source of the bleeding whether it is anterior origin or posterior origin. Anterior bleeding origin will have a frank bleeding from nasal cavity but usually resolves more quickly and without any complications whilst posterior bleeding may need more aggressive management and usually the patient will be observed for a some time.

After the examination, the patient will be given gauze soaked by the topical vasoconstrictor, commonly used are 4% cocaine solution or phenylepinephrine solution and the anesthetic agent, lidocaine solution to be put into the nasal cavity and direct pressure, i.e. grasping and pinching the nose, will be repeated. If this method is unsuccessful then it is considered to do the chemical cauterization using silver nitrate or electro cauterization for 30 seconds on the suspected primary bleeding site. However, to avoid septal injury, cauterization must only be done on one side of the septum.

If the cauterization fails then the nose should be packed using either traditional nasal packing or prefabricated nasal sponge. Sometimes an epistaxis balloon can also be used. The tampon will be inserted along the nasal cavity deep into the nose as far as it can then, it will be left there for three to five days to ensure the formation of adequate clot. When tampons are used, antistaphylococcal antibiotic ointment will be given to prevent toxic shock syndrome.



Management for posterior bleeding will be more difficult and more aggressive, It is usually performed by an otolaryngologist. It is treated by using posterior nose packing, either the posterior epistaxis balloon or Belloq tampon.



Patient with nosebleed may be discharged if the bleeding stops and no complication found. However, all patients are recommended to consult to an otolaryngologist within 48 to 72 hours for further examination especially those who are required tampons to stop the bleeding.

Shortly, nosebleed treatment may be simple but several conditions that need more caution and is recommended to seek an otolaryngologist are if:

	The nosebleed happens repeatedly, especially in young boys range between 7 years old to 19 years old. It may be one of the symptoms of juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma.
	The nosebleed is followed by pain in the ear (otalgia), tinnitus and happens in males, it is recommended to seek an otolaryngologist as it may be the early clinical manifestation of nasopharnyx carcinoma.
	The nosebleed happens massively and the general condition is bad, i.e. the patient looks weak and pale, increased breathing cycle also feeling shortness of breath. These may be signs of blood circulation failure because of the excessive bleeding. Immediate medical assistance is necessary.

Sources:

	Kucik, Corry J and Timothy C. Management of Epistaxis. Am Fam Physician 2005;71:305-311,312.
	Evans, Jeffrey A and Todd R. eMedicine Specialties: Epistaxis. Last updated: November 28, 2007.
	Mangunkusumo, Endang and Retno W. Buku Ajar Ilmu Kesehatan Telinga Hidung Tenggorok Kepala Leher. Edisi ke-6. Jakarta. Fakultas Kedokteran Universitas Indonesia. 2008. Hal 155-9.
