The Right Diet for Cardio Diet
Gary Foster, PhD, director of the Center for Obesity Research and Education at Temple University, Philadelphia had studied in the medical journal †Annals of Internal Medicine, explained that cardiovascular risk factors, such as blood pressure and cholesterol levels responded better with the low-carb diet. Both diets produce identical weight loss when coupled with comprehensive behavior treatment. It appears that both diets are equally good for losing weight, but the low-carb diet protects you from potential coronary heart disease more effectively.

Foster added:
"At the end of the day, behavior interventions are key. Dieters should be less concerned about what diet they follow, and more concerned with employing effective behavioral strategies, such as recording what they eat, logging their exercise, and limiting the triggers for overeating, like watching TV or eating in the car‚Äù
25 Top Heart-Healthy Foods

A Dietitian in the Preventive Cardiology Center applied that are fruits and vegetables in many colors, shapes, sizes that are good for our heart which we can definitely reduce the risk of developing cardiovascular disease by eating these foods every day.

Whole grains, beans and legumes, nuts, fatty fish, and teas are just as important -- offering all sorts of complex heart-protective phytonutrients.



That's why variety is best in selecting heart-healthy foods, says Suzanne Farrell, MS, RD, a spokeswoman for the American Dietetic Association and owner of Cherry Creek Nutrition in Denver. A heart-healthy is not only about oatmeal and omega-3 fats but we need to look for ways to get all the different nutrients and heart-healthy lifestyle longer is also important.

With the help of these nutrition experts from The Cleveland Clinic and the American Dietetic Association, we've put together a list of the "best of the best" heart-healthy foods.

The foods listed here are all top-performers in protecting your heart and blood vessels. We've also got menu ideas -- so you can easily bring heart-healthy foods into your daily breakfast, lunch, and dinner.

	Salmon : Omega-3 fatty acids. Best Served : Grill salmon with marinade.
	Flaxseed (ground) : Omega-3 fatty acids, fiber, phytoestrogens. Best served : yogurt parfaits, morning cereal, homemade muffins, or cookies.
	Oatmeal : Omega-3 fatty acids; magnesium; potassium; folate; niacin; calcium; soluble fiber.
	Kidney Beans: B-complex vitamins; niacin; folate; magnesium; omega-3 fatty acids; calcium; soluble fiber.
	Almonds.†Nutrients: Plant omega-3 fatty acids; vitamin E; magnesium; fiber; heart-favorable mono- and polyunsaturated fats; phytosterols.
	Walnuts.†Nutrients: Plant omega-3 fatty acids; vitamin E; magnesium; folate; fiber; heart-favorable mono- and polyunsaturated fats; phytosterols.
	Red wine.†Nutrients: Catechins and reservatrol (flavonoids).
	Tuna.†Nutrients: Omega-3 fatty acids; folate; niacin.
	Tofu.†Nutrients: Niacin; folate; calcium; magnesium; potassium.
	Brown rice.†Nutrients: B-complex vitamins; fiber; niacin; magnesium, fiber.
	Soy milk.†Nutrients: Isoflavones (a flavonoid); B-complex vitamins; niacin; folate, calcium; magnesium; potassium; phytoestrogens.
	Blueberries.†Nutrients: Beta-carotene and lutein (carotenoids); anthocyanin (a flavonoid); ellagic acid (a polyphenol); vitamin C; folate; calcium, magnesium; potassium; fiber.†Best served in trail mixes, muffins, salads!
	Carrots.†Nutrients: Alpha-carotene (a carotenoid); fiber.
	Spinach.†Nutrients: Lutein (a carotenoid); B-complex vitamins; folate; magnesium; potassium; calcium; fiber.
	Broccoli.†Nutrients: Beta-carotene (a carotenoid); Vitamins C and E; potassium; folate; calcium; fiber.
	Sweet potato.†Nutrients: Beta-carotene (a carotenoid); vitamins A, C, E; fiber.
	Red bell peppers.†Nutrients: Beta-carotene and lutein (carotenoids); B-complex vitamins; folate; potassium; fiber.
	Asparagus.†Nutrients: Beta-carotene and lutein (carotenoids); B-complex vitamins; folate; fiber.
	Oranges.†Nutrients: Beta-cryptoxanthin, beta- and alpha-carotene, lutein (carotenoids) and flavones (flavonoids); vitamin C; potassium; folate; fiber.
	Tomatoes†
	Acorn squash†
	Cantaloupe.†Nutrients: Alpha- and beta-carotene and lutein (carotenoids); B-complex and C vitamins; folate; potassium; fiber.
	Papaya.†Nutrients: Beta-carotene, beta-cryptoxanthin, lutein (carotenoids); Vitamins C and E; folate; calcium; magnesium; potassium.
	Dark chocolate
	Tea†


Explanation:

Phytoestrogens

are substances in plants (like flaxseed) that have a weak estrogen-like action in the body. Studies suggest that flaxseed lowers the risk of blood clots, stroke, and cardiac arrhythmias. It may also help lower total and LDL "bad" cholesterol and triglycerides, and even blood pressure.

Phytosterols are plant sterols that chemically resemble cholesterol -- and seem to reduce blood cholesterol. All nuts and seeds, including wheat germ, have phytosterols.

Carotenoids are heart-protective antioxidants in many colorful fruits and veggies. Alpha-carotene, beta-carotene, lutein, and lycopene are carotenoids.

Polyphenols are another set of antioxidants that protect blood vessels, lower blood pressure, reduce LDL "bad" cholesterol.

Flavonoid polyphenols include catechins, flavonones, flavonols, isoflavones, reservatrol, and anthocyanins.

Non-flavonoid polyphenols include ellagic acid (found in all types of berries).

Omega-3 fatty acids (found in fatty fish like salmon) and alpha-linolenic fatty acids (found in plant foods like walnuts) help boost the immune system, reduce blood clots, and protect against heart attacks. They also increase good HDL levels, lower triglyceride levels, protect arteries from plaque buildup, are anti-inflammatories, and lower blood pressure.

B-complex vitamins -- like Vitamin B-12 (folate) and vitamin B-6 -- protect against blood clots and atherosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries.

Niacin (vitamin B-3) helps increase HDL "good" cholesterol.

Vitamins C and E are antioxidants that protect cells from free radical damage. Magnesium, potassium, and calcium help lower blood pressure. Fiber-rich foods help lower cholesterol levels.