Dermatological Problems in Diabetic Patients
Do you suffer from diabetes? Or maybe your parents, relatives, friends or spouse is suffering from diabetes? If yes, maybe you can recognize one of several skin disorders that will be discussed in this article. Try to remember, how many diabetic person you know that must be amputated because of severe tissue death in their extremities? This actually can be prevented if the disorders are recognized and treated early.

Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder due to the lack of insulin that causes high blood sugar level. Usually diabetic patient will exhibit classic symptoms such as frequent urination, increased appetite and excessive thirst. Diabetes mellitus is one of the major causes of disability and death in America.

People with diabetes have a susceptibility to certain diseases and one of them is skin disease. We will discuss several skin ailments that are often found in patients with diabetes.

1. Diabetic Foot

Diabetic foot often leads to amputation in many diabetic patients. This condition is mainly caused by nerve disorder (neuropathy), which is one of the complications of diabetes. Aside from that, abnormality in blood vessels, blockages of blood vessels that deliver nutrition to extremities and infection also have important roles. For example, open wounds that may evolve into ulcers, can get infected and then infiltrate the surrounding tissue resulting in tissue death. If the wound was considered to be life threatening, the amputation of the affected limb may be the only way to safe the patient’s life.

Diabetic foot ulcer is mostly located at the soles because they experience constant pressure that could go unnoticed because of preceding sensory disorder. Therefore, the use of proper footwear in diabetic patients is strongly recommended, as well as with the regular feet examination.

2. Infection

Diabetes patients have higher risk of skin infection because of the weakened immune system. Infection commonly caused by bacteria and fungi.

3. Limitations of joint movement and oily skin

Usually the limitation of movement starts at the little finger and joints between the palms of the hands and fingers. These happen on both hands and do not accompanied by pain. It is important to know because 30-50% of diabetic patients experienced it and it is related to complications of the small vessels, which might result in disorders of the kidney and retina of the eye.

4. Diabetic dermopathy

This is the most common dermatological sign that can be observed in diabetic patients. 50% of patients with diabetes experienced this dermopathy, especially the male.

5. Akantosis Nigrikans

Akantosis nigrikans is a brownish or blackish grey patch on the skin especially on the back of the neck, armpits, groin and the folds of the stomach. These patches make the before mentioned area looked dirty. It is mostly of a cosmetic concern. There have yet be an effective treatment for this condition.

6. Nekrobiosis Lipoidica

The cause is not yet known. Cosmetic reasons and perceived pain is the main complaint. If it gets no treatment then this can develop into an ulcer. Usually found on the calves, torso, face and scalp.

That's some abnormalities and diseases that are often found in diabetic patients. Recognize them early to prevent disabilities, or even, death.

There are several regular foot cares that are recommended to reduce the disability risk for diabetic patients, such as:

	Check feet and soles every day
	Clean with water regularly and dry them gently (do not rub too hard as it may cause new wounds)
	The best water temperature is below 37 degrees Celsius. Before the water was used, check the temperature with your hands; do not test it directly to the foot.
	Use footwear both outside and indoor. The use of socks or stockings is recommended to reduce friction between the skin and footwear.
	Look at and feel your footwear to ensure no sharp or foreign objects such as rocks that can injure feet are present.
	If the patient have visual problems, it is best to have someone else to take care of the foot for them
	Moisturizer should be used on dry skin.
	Change socks or pantyhose every day.
	Clip nails regularly and be careful of small injuries.
	If there is skin soles that hardens, don't remove it yourself by cutting them out. If you want it to be removed consult your health workers.
	Patients should be immediately brought to a health institution if there are cuts.
