Feet Disorder in Diabetic Patients
Diabetes Mellitus is a carbohydrate metabolism disorder that can cause complications by damaging certain organs, one of them is the foot. The damage may be caused by the occurrence of vascular disorders (macro/microangiopathy) which in turn is caused by the increased blood sugar levels. Diabetic microangiopathy is a complication that attacks the small blood vessels and can be divided into neuropathy (peripheral nerve disorders), nephropathy (kidney disorders) and retinopathy (disorders involving the eyes).

Diabetic foot, or diabetic foot ulcers, is one of the complications of diabetes mellitus that can occur and preceded by neuropathy, angiopathy, infections and trauma.

Peripheral neuropathy (peripheral nerve disorders) in patients with diabetes mellitus includes interference with motor, sensory and autonomic nerves. Disorder of the peripheral nerve is caused by vascular disorders that decreased perfusion to the neural network and slowing of nerve conduction.

Disturbances in motor nerves are muscle weakness and atrophy in the muscles of the hand and foot that can cause deformity and changes in pressure point on the soles of the feet.

Disturbance in the sensory nerves causes the patient to feel pain, burning sensation and numbness in both hands and feet that are progressive. Numbness in the feet may cause injury and unavoidable pressure on the wound.

In autonomic nervous disorder, there is a change in the tonus of blood vessels and temperature regulation that can cause congestion of the venous blood vessels. This congestion may cause tissue swelling, which eventually can cause injury and infection. Moreover, the skin becomes drier due to disruption of the autonomic nervous system of the sweat glands and blood vessels of the skin. The cracked and scarred skin facilitates an easy entry for bacteria which will lead to an infection.

Angiopathy in diabetic patients consists of changes in blood vessel walls and the imbalance of some substance in the blood vessels that lead to vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation and the slowing of blood flow. It will facilitate the occurrence of plaques and cause blockages in the distal arteries so that the tissue perfusion will decrease and lead to tissue damage or death.

As has been noted above, infections have a role in diabetic foot. Bacteria that infects the wound can come from such a small aperture such as a dry, cracked skin and spread throughout the surrounding tissue. This is mainly due to the high sugar levels in the blood, which is a very good media for bacterial growth. High blood sugar level also disrupts the body’s chemotaxis mechanism that resulted in the slowing of bacterial elimination process.
Trauma is also one of the aggravating factors. Continuous pressure on foot either due to weight or deformities can cause damage to the skin.

Clinical symptom of diabetic foot can be in the form of dry, scaly, swollen lower extremities with some moist area. This skin condition is preceded by vibration and position orientation disorders. The positional orientation disorder is identified when the patient does not know the direction of the feet that the examiner moved. This examination is valid if the patient can still feel his legs.

The clinical symptoms can be divided into several stages:

	Stage 1: No typical symptoms
	Stage 2: Intermittent claudication (pain during activities that receded at rest)
	Stage 3: Pain during rest
	Stage 4: Tissue damage due to anoxia (wound)

Diabetic ulcer most commonly occurs at the toes. Sometimes, ulcers occur along with claw toes, an intrinsic muscles paralysis.

To determine the prognosis and therapy of diabetic ulcer physicians usually use Wagner’s classification for diabetic ulcer:

	Grade 0: Intact skin with the bone deformities that put the feet at risk
	Grade 1: Local and superficial ulcer
	Grade 2: Deep ulcers involving the tendons, ligaments, bones, or joints
	Grade 3: Deep abscess, cellulitis or osteomyelitis
	Grade 4: Deep ulcers with gangrenous heel or toes
	Grade 5: Widespread gangrene

Management

The main objective on diabetic foot management is prevention of wound. The second one is to control the underlying diabetes on a regular basis. A good blood sugar control and prevention of injuries can prevent functional disabilities so that the patient can live independently. If there have been any injuries or deformities, then the management includes wound treatment, reconstructive operation and rehabilitation.

In preventing foot trauma, especially in the bony area of the soles, precautionary measures that can be done are maintaining the cleanliness of the feet, moisturize regularly and cushion bone protrusions with the use of insoles.

As for suggestions for the treatment of diabetic foot:

	Always use comfortable shoes
	Keep the feet warm, dry, and clean
	Pay attention to each feet every day, including between the toes
	Avoid hot and warm water
	Trim your nails and calluses
	Never walk barefoot
	Treat any existing wounds

Wound care at an early stage is to perform optimum debridement (wound cleaning) by cleaning out all the dead tissues. After that, based on the severity of the wound, it should be considered whether the patient needs to be treated in the hospital or not.