Up Close and Personal with Hypertension
Hypertension is a condition in which there is an increased of blood pressure. Blood pressure itself is the amount of pressure inside blood vessels. It is recorded in two phases of heart contractility, which are systolic (when the heart pumps the blood to the body) and diastolic (a moment before the heart pumps the blood to the body). For example, when a blood pressure measurement reads 120/80 mmHg, it means the systolic pressure is 120 and the diastolic pressure is 80, both in millimetre mercury unit.



SIGN AND SYMPTOMS

Diagnosis of hypertension is made when someone has an increased blood pressure. It is measured with sphygmomanometer, or tensimeter.




Classification
Systolic Pressure (mmHg)
 
Diastolic Pressure (mmHg)


Normal

&lt;120


and


&lt;80



Prehypertension

120-139


or


80-89



Hypertension, Stage 1

140-159


or


90-99



Hypertension, Stage 2

â‰¥160


or


â‰¥100





&nbsp;

Hypertension crisis is referred to blood pressure measured more than 180/120 mmHg. It is then classified further into urgent hypertension (without symptoms of organ damage) and emergency hypertension (with symptoms of organ damage).

&nbsp;

CAUSES

There are two types of hypertension causes. The primary cause, or so called essential hypertension, is genetically inherited. Its incidence increases as the person grow older, and mostly occurs at the age of 40.

Secondary hypertension is caused by external factors such as kidney disease, hormone abnormalities, blood vessel rigidity, congenital cardiovascular disease, drugs (such as steroids, high dose of estrogen), brain tumour, and pregnancy.

&nbsp;

MANAGEMENT AND THERAPY

Hypertension can be managed by lifestyle modifications, such as:

	Reducing body weight,
	Consuming fruit and vegetables,
	Reducing cholesterol-rich food intake
	Regular exercise,
	Limiting alcohol consumption not more than 30 ml per day,
	Reducing salt consumption.

On the other hand, hypertension can also be treated with drug therapy. Commonly, therapies given are:

	Diuretics, such as furosemide;
	Aldosterone receptor blockers, such as spironolactone;
	Beta-blockers, such as propanolol;
	Combination of alpha and beta-blockers, such as labetalol;
	ACE-inhibitors, such as captopril;
	Angiotensin II antagonists, such as irbesartan.

&nbsp;

COMPLICATIONS

Commonly, hypertension leads to ischemic heart disease, which often gives symptoms of heart attack. Depending on the cause of hypertension, other common hypertension complications are stroke, eye problems, chronic kidney disease, peripheral vascular disease, pulmonary embolism and even death.

&nbsp;

PREVENTION

Hypertension can be prevented by reducing salt intake and consumption of cholesterol-rich food, exercising regularly, and consuming lots of vegetables and fruits. People at risk, those whose ages are above 40 years old or have family history of hypertension, are recommended to check their blood pressure regularly.

&nbsp;

There is relationship between hypertension and heightened emotion. People with uncontrolled hypertension who are in their highest emotional status may trigger complications such as heart attack, stroke or even sudden cardiac death.

Hypertension needs a lifelong treatment. It cannot be cured, but can be controlled hence preventing the complications. Therefore, hypertensive patients must consume their drug therapy continuously.

For further information, please contact your family doctors, internists or nephrology and endocrinology subspecialists.