Living without Hypertension
Have you ever heard the term of ‘high blood pressure’? Have you ever visited your doctor and he/she says that you have hypertension? What is hypertension and how to handle it? Do we get rid of hypertension? Maybe some of these questions ever arise in the mind of the reader. Hopefully by reading this article may answer some questions about hypertension.



Hypertension is a disorder that occurs in our circulatory system, causing blood pressure to be higher than they should be. There are many factors that can cause the elevation of blood pressure, such as heavy physical activity, the narrowing and blockages of blood vessels, hormonal influences, and others.

Most readers would wonder why are they suffering from hypertension but do not have any symptoms or other disorder that may cause the disease. Most people with hypertension cannot find the cause and do not have any symptoms. In other words, they suffer from essential hypertension.

Is this hypertension can be cured? The answer is no. Hypertension with known aetiology (for example by narrowing the blood vessels) may be cured. However, essential hypertension is a disease which there is no known aetiology up to date. Therefore, to control the disease and prevent its complications, what we can do is to restore the blood pressure as low as possible and keeping it within normal limits. There are several ways that you can do to control your blood pressure, such as:

	Lose weight: Overweight is one factor that can worsen the disease. Therefore, we should always keep our weight to be within normal body mass index. What is the ideal weight for you? You can try to calculate it by using the formula: weight (kg) / {height (m)} 2. Normal values ranged from 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m2. If the result of your calculation is above the range of normal values, then you should start to lose some weight.
	Reduce fatty foods: People with hypertension should reduce fatty foods, such as various types of meat and its products. You should eat more vegetables and fruits. This does not mean you are absolutely forbidden to eat animal products. All people with hypertension have the freedom to eat anything, just that you should eat less animal products because it contains cholesterol, which can aggravate your heart and blood vessel function.
	Reduce salt intake: The salt here is not only salt that you use to cook, but all foods or drinks that contain sodium (usually written with 'Na' on the packaging).
	Sports: Some people say that person with hypertension should not exercise because it would burden the heart. This statement is so wrong. Hypertensive patients should exercise regularly, at least 30 minutes per day. It is up to you what kind of exercise, for example you can do jogging, walking, or playing sports that you like. This kind of activity can nourish your circulatory system.
	Do not drink alcohol and smoke.

&nbsp;

Above of all, you should consult with your doctor. Because if your blood pressure is too high, then lifestyle changes will not be enough to normalize your blood pressure. Sometimes, it is necessary to take antihypertensive drugs. The dose of antihypertensive medication must be adjusted by your doctor. This drug must be taken continuously, so that your blood pressure remained stable. Patients who have taken antihypertensive medications should regularly check up with their doctor every two months so that your doctor can reassess the antihypertensive medications, dose adjustment and guiding your lifestyle change.