Interpreting and Understanding The Blood Pressure Test
I‚Äôm sure that all of you had ever been measured your blood pressure. You will always found this test in medical practices. But, have you understood this test and its result? So, here we go.

How to say the result

If you can read the result properly, then you will deliver the right information to your doctor. The blood pressure is defined in two numbers, written as a ratio, with mm Hg (millimeters of mercury) unit.

So, when your blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg, you will say it as ‚Äú120 over 80 millimeters of mercury‚Äù. †You may put the unit measurement off, because it will still be understandable.

The meaning of the result

The first or the top number is called the systolic number. It measures the blood pressure in arteries when the heart beats or contracts.

The second or the bottom one is called diastolic number. It measures the pressure in arteries when the heart is resting and the blood is filling the heart‚Äôs chamber.

Both of them are important. But, the systolic number is typically used for assessing the cardiovascular risk in older people.

What is the normal blood pressure?

We are using the American Heart Association or AHA‚Äôs recommendation.

&nbsp;




Category


Systolic
mm Hg





Diastolic
mm Hg




Normal


Less than 120


and


Less than 80




Pre-hypertension


120 - 139


or


80 - 89




1st grade hypertension


140 - 159


or


90 - 99




2nd grade hypertension


160 or higher


or


100†or higher




Hypertensive crisis
(Emergency therapy needed)


Higher than 180


or


Higher than 110




&nbsp;

How the hypertension is diagnosed?

Your doctor will ask questions to get the accurate data for diagnosing the hypertension. The blood pressure is varied, depending on body posture, activity, stress, sleep, and so on.† The normal blood pressure is less than 120/80 m Hg (less than 120 in systolic AND less than 80 in diastolic number).

When your blood pressure is higher than normal, your doctor need to measure your pressure several of times before diagnosing hypertension. You will be observed, run several tests, until the diagnosing. So, a single measuring result cannot be use as diagnosis.

My systolic number is higher than 180! What should I do, doc?

When you measure your blood pressure and you get the systolic number 140 or above or diastolic number 110 or above, don‚Äôt panic. Wait for a couple of minutes, then measure it again. If the result is still same, then it is advisable to seek for a medical help because it could be a hypertensive crisis.

Source: American Heart Association