The Healthy Heart Recipe
Heart disease is a scary thing. We often hear a lot of sudden death caused by it.

The heart disease may happen if there is an obstruction in the heart blood vessel. The obstruction will lead to the damage in heart, hence so it cannot function normally. This obstruction is usually a progressive process. It takes some time for a complete obstruction to occur. There are also a lot of risk factors that can trigger it, such as high lipid diet, low physical activity, smoking, excessive stress, and genetics.



What can I do to prevent?

You can reform your habit to prevent heart disease. Change your lifestyle by regular healthy diet, taking the right supplement and last but not the least is your motivation to change. Frequent consumption of fruits, beans and grains is also beneficial for your health.

But, Doc, may I eat beef or other meat? The answer is Yes! However, you have to choose which meat to eat. It is recommended to eat a low-fat one i.e. not eating fried dish or avoid the part of the meat which contains high fat, for example, eat the chicken, but do not eat the skin.

You may need the mineral and supplementation for your heart, like:

	Magnesium, to regulate the heart beat. Also the other mineral balance, like calcium, potassium, and sodium are important for heart function too.
	Folic acid combined with vitamin B6 and B12, can lower the risk of heart disease and stroke. The folic acid will lower the homocystein level. High homocystein level can trigger the heart attack. Folic acid is important for child development, blood formation, and digestive health, too.
	Potassium, can lower the sodium level in blood.
	Vitamin C, which can help to prevent scurvy. Half of scurvy patients are found dead because of the rupture of blood vessel. Vitamin C can help strengthening blood vessel’s wall and inhibiting the formation of lipoprotein-a, a component that is usually found in the clotting of blood vessel.
	Calcium, which is well-known for stronger teeth and bones, apparently also helps by regulating the heartbeat and clotting process.
	Niacin which is important in lipid metabolism and it can increase the good cholesterol level.
	Lycopene, an antioxidant that will help neutralizing the free radical. Tomato is found to be rich in lycopene. So eating tomato helps your heart healthier.

When do you start to eat this supplement? The answer is simple, if the supplement you consume comes in a medicinal package, then it is advisable to seek medical advice beforehand. But if you consume them by consuming food rich in those minerals and vitamins, then you may start now.

Hence, the recipes of healthy heart are a healthy diet, regular physical activity, stress and smoking avoidance and good enough mineral supplementation. With these recipes, one may decrease the risk of heart disease.