Fasting is Good For Your Heart
Ramadan is coming, so it is time for fasting again. But actually, fasting is not exclusively a religious activity, it is also recommended as a healthy life-style. However, before you start fasting, you have to know how to do it right so, you will keep your body healthy. It is also recommended for a heart disease patient.



It is found that people who fast regularly will have 40-45% lower risk of developing coronary heart disease than people who do not. Why? Because by fasting routinely, it will decrease the blood bad-cholesterol level and increase the good-cholesterol level hence, decrease the risk of stroke.

Fasting causes the body to be under stress and ‚Äúhungry‚Äù, so it will release more cholesterol and burn it to energy. This mechanism will slowly decrease the amount of fat cells in body. In a conference at New Orleans, there is a research of 30 patients that are asked for fasting in 24 hours. They may only drink plain water. And the result, the fasting increases their growth hormone 13 times in female and 20 times in male. This hormone is released by body in the ‚Äúhungry period‚Äù to defend the muscle and trigger the body to burn fat.

Another research from United State‚Äôs Intermountain Health Care in Salt Lake City said that routine fasting could decrease the heart disease risk. The result was that 75% had narrowing vessel in people that never had fasting. While, in fasting people, it was †58% more lower. Further research conducted in 2008 by The American Journal of Cardiology said that they found a good relationship between fasting and heart disease in 448 patients.

Therefore, fasting is good for health. Patient with heart disease who wants to fast, has to consultation with his family doctor first. Because there may be several adjustments particularly their drugs taking hour.

Other good-things from fasting

Fasting will boost our immune system because it decreases the calorie intake and lowers the oxygen consumption. This will then decrease the metabolism rate and the free-radical production. As we have known, that excessive free radical will inhibit enzymatic work and trigger gene mutation, then it will damage the cellular wall, a mechanism that will lead to a degenerative disease like stroke and heart disease.

The reduction of calorie intake in fasting will also elevate the cell sensitivity to insulin that control blood glucose. So it will reduce the diabetic risk in healthy people. This fact has been approved by American College of Cardiology.

The good fasting

When you are fasting, it is advisable not to eat excessively because of a thought that you will not eat again for the rest of the day. That is a wrong way of fasting. Eat with regular portion when breakfast or suhoor (pre-dawn meal in Ramadan fasting) and meal at the end of the fast or iftar.

It is recommended to avoid high fat meal like red meat (beef, goat meet). You may eat medium portion of white meet like chicken without its fat, or fish meat that have high level of protein, omega-3, omega-6, mineral and vitamin.

Milk, tempe, and tofu can be a good source of protein and energy for the whole day. And remember to reduce the intake of salt and smoking.

You are recommended to eat a lot of fruits and vegetables because they are fiber-rich and are source of energy too. The example of ‚Äúenergy‚Äù fruits are banana, papaya, orange, and apple.

Don‚Äôt forget about water. It is recommended to drink 6-8 glasses per day. You can split them into one glass when waking up, a glass after suhoor, a glass when end of the fast, and four glass in the night or after night salat (Tarawih).† In the end of the fast, you may eat sweet dessert like date palm fruit, fruit cocktail, or fruit juice. Don‚Äôt drink cold water or ice water because it will make you full. After several hours after the end of the fast, you may eat dinner.

A date palm fruit is a fruit with various nutrients like potassium and fiber.

Conclusion

So, the people with heart disease may fast under a physician‚Äôs guidance with healthy diet and keep having a healthy lifestyle. So, marhaban ya Ramadan! Welcome to Ramadan.

Reference:

Horne BD, May HT, Anderson JL, Usefulness of routine periodic fasting to lower risk of coronary artery disease in patients undergoing coronary angiography. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Oct 1;102(7):814-819. Epub 2008 Jul 10.‚Ä®2.†† †Aslam F. Religion. Fasting and coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Jan 15;103(2):292.‚Ä®3.†† †Shelton, HF. Fasting for heart disease. 1st Ed. Kessinger Publishing, LLC;2006.