Breast Check Up : Mammography or Ultrasound?
The incidence of malignant breast tumors in Indonesia is quite high. The relative mortality rate has not changed much even if there has been much progress in developing better treatments. Therefore, early diagnosis plays an important role in lowering the death rate from breast malignancy.

[caption id="attachment_12388" align="aligncenter" width="533"] Infiltrating duct carcinoma (breast malignant tumors)[/caption]

A thorough clinical examination to identify an early stage of breast malignancy is sometimes not enough. It is also requires other investigations, such as mammography and ultrasound. These imaging should complement but not competing the result of physical examination because each of them has their advantages and limitations.

Roles of Mammography in Breast Malignancy.

Mammography is an imaging technique that uses X-rays to provide a detailed picture of the breast. Mammography plays an important role in early detection of breast cancer.

There are two types of mammography: screening and diagnostic. Screening mammography is done on women without any complaints. Mammography screening is recommended every 1-2 years for women aged above 40 years old and every year for women above 50 years old. But for women who have high risk factors for breast cancer i.e. a family history of breast cancer, screening mammography can be performed before the age of 40 years old.
Diagnostic mammography is performed on women who have symptoms, such as any findings of breast lump or a foul smelling breast discharge, etc. Diagnostic mammography aims to determine the size and the exact location of abnormality, including the involvement of lymph nodes and the surrounding tissue. Mammography has a diagnostic accuracy rate of 94% if it is unaided. But when it is used along with mammography ultrasound (USG) in obtaining diagnostic procedure, the accuracy rate will increase as high as 97%. In comparison, the ultrasound will only yield a diagnostic accuracy rate of 78%.

Roles of Ultrasound in Breast Malignancy
Examination using the Ultrasound (USG) has been increasingly popular and growing rapidly. Ultrasound is considered harmless because it does not use ionizing rays, so there will not have any radiation hazard. Not to mention the examination is also relatively easy to do, non invasive, rapid, and relatively low cost.

Ultrasound has a good contrast resolution, so the distinguished images are very clear including the fluid-filled areas (cysts) of normal breast tissue. Despite the good quality of spatial resolution, the ultrasound cannot provide a detailed description as in mammography. More over, it cannot distinguish the presence of micro calcifications, which is one of the typical signs of breast malignancy.

Because of these limitations, the ultrasound are used on cases of dense breasts of young women but have little fat. However, unfortunately it cannot be used as a screening tool in breast malignancy. It is recommended to use the ultrasound together with the mammography as it will increase the sensitivity of the ultrasound and the mammography.

Preventing is always better than curing. Hence, it is always encouraged for women to have a good understanding of breast cancer and undergo the regular check up in order to live a healthy life.