CEEBM FKUI-RSCM 2nd Annual Scientific Forum, 20-22 September 2011
We would like to invite you to join us to be a part of the 2nd Annual Scientific Forum, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Evidence-Based Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Indonesia, Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital. The 1st Annual Scientific Forum has been successfully held in 2010 and marked as the grand opening for CEEBM FKUI-RSCM. This year the event will be held with three schemes, e.g., Seminar Health Technology Assessment, Workshop Translational Research, and Call on Proposal for CEEBM Awards.

The 2nd Annual Scientific Forum 2011 reflects our concern on the importance of Health Technology Assessment in hospital, the advancing knowledge in Translational Research as well as the importance of collaboration to produce a high quality of research with the ultimate goal of high quality of patient‚Äôs health care. Additionally, call on proposal for CEEBM Awards is held to promote research culture, collaboration within and between institutions and to collect the high quality, original and innovative proposals from researchers in FKUI-RSCM, hereinafter will be developed and funded together with FKUI-RSCM.

The prominent speakers in the respective fields will deliver the interesting topics. The event aims for clinicians, students, researchers as well as policy makers from various backgrounds, e.g., hospitals, government (districts and provincial health office), universities, and NGOs across Indonesia. We believe that this is an excellent opportunity for you to gain experience and to widen your knowledge in health technology assessment and translational research.

	SEMINAR: HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT ‚ÄúFrom Evidence into High Quality Health Care‚Äù †Tuesday, 20 September 2011 Registration fee: Rp. 300.000
	WORKSHOP : TRANSLATION REASEARCH ‚ÄúNo Health Without Research, No Research Without Collaboration‚Äù †Wednesday - Thursday, 21-22 September 2011 †Registration fee: Rp. 1.000.000
	CALL ON PROPOSAL August - September 2011 †Submit your proposal before 16 September 2011 †and win @Rp. 10.000.000 for 3 best proposals


For more information: click here

&nbsp;

&nbsp;