PSA Test Reduces Prostate Cancer Deaths By 40%
When it comes to the documented 40 percent effectiveness of PSA testing  in preventing death from prostate cancer,  neither the American Cancer Society nor the discoverer of the PSA  protein, Richard Ablin, are telling the public the complete story.

The PSA test, the most prevalent method in use today for prostate  cancer, has saved thousands of lives.  The PSA test and advances in  treatment have led to a 40 percent reduction in prostate cancer  deaths since the mid-1990s, according to the National Cancer Institute.   Because of the PSA test, 90 percent of all prostate cancers are  now discovered before they spread outside the gland, according to  the American Cancer Society's own data.

Dr. Patrick C. Walsh, distinguished professor of urology at Johns  Hopkins University noted, "Because prostate cancer produces no symptoms  until it's too far advanced to cure, as appropriate, men should have a  PSA test and examination. Until an alternative exists, prostate cancer  testing is the best option we have to allow men to make an informed  decision."

Despite misleading claims by the ACS, the value of early detection  through PSA testing is supported by more than a dozen leading U.S.  organizations.

These include the American Urological Association, National  Comprehensive Cancer Network, Prostate Cancer Foundation, Prostate  Cancer Research Institute, Malecare Prostate Cancer Support, Men's  Health Network, National Alliance of State Prostate Cancer Coalitions,  Prostate Cancer International, Prostate Conditions Education Council,  Prostate Health Education Network, The Prostate Net, Us TOO  International Prostate Cancer Education and Support Network, and Women  Against Prostate Cancer.

This is not the first time that the ACS has been sharply challenged.   Claims that their views are based on "scientific evidence" were disputed  as recently as late last year (and more recently, at the 2010  Genitourinary Cancers Symposium held last week).

ACS became embroiled in a firestorm of controversy last October by  seeking to change its guidelines that women did not need an annual  mammogram until age 50, instead of 40.  ACS quickly backed off after an  outcry from the public and health and government officials.

"The only difference between the PSA test and mammograms is there aren't  millions of men who will stand up to the claims being peddled by  Brawley and the American Cancer Society," Lockwood said.

Contrary to ACS claims, medical data suggest mammograms and PSA testing  are effective.  Based on data by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force  (USPSTF), mammography screening has led to a 15 percent reduction in breast cancer deaths. USPSTF also references an  ongoing screening study where early detection (using the PSA test) has  so far reduced prostate cancer deaths by 20 percent.

"This concerted agenda by ACS and Mr. Ablin, both in their timing and  their message, purposely fails to disclose all of the facts about PSA  testing.  Mr. Ablin in particular should be pleased that his discovery  of PSA has led to a 40 percent reduction in prostate cancer deaths."

Similarities between breast and prostate cancer data in the U.S. are  striking.  Each is the most frequently diagnosed noncutaneous cancer and the second leading cause of  cancer death for their respective gender.  In 2009, new cases of each  cancer were at about 194,000.  One in six men is struck with prostate  cancer annually; for breast cancer, it's one in eight women.

Source: The Project to End Prostate Cancer