Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
Abnormal uterine (womb) bleeding is a common problem in women.  Abnormal uterine bleeding can occur as either a change in your normal  menstrual period or as bleeding in between your normal menses.
How Do I Know if I Have Abnormal Uterine  Bleeding?
You might have abnormal uterine bleeding if you have one of the  following symptoms. If you have any of these symptoms, you should  discuss it with your health care provider:

	Bleeding for more than 7 days—Normal  menstrual bleeding (your period) lasts for 2 to 7 days. Bleeding that  lasts for more than 7 days may indicate a problem.
	Frequent episodes of bleeding—Your  menstrual cycle length is determined by counting the number of days from  the start (day 1 of bleeding) of one menstrual period to the start (day  1) of the next menstrual period. Most women have a cycle length of 21  to 35 days. Bleeding more often than every 21 days or less often than  every 35 days may indicate a problem.
	Bleeding between menstrual periods—Any  bleeding at times other than during your normal menstrual period is  considered abnormal.
	Bleeding after sexual activity—If you  have vaginal bleeding after having sexual activity, especially after  vaginal intercourse, it might be a sign of a problem.
	Clots—An occasional small blood clot  during your menses, the size of a quarter or smaller, is nothing to  worry about. However, there may be a problem if you regularly pass  larger clots or many small clots when you have your period.
	Bleeding that changes your life—If your  menstrual bleeding makes you avoid social events, miss work or school,  sleep on towels, or set your alarm to get up in the middle of the night  to change your pad or tampon, you may have too much bleeding. If you  find yourself asking the question, "Am I bleeding too much?," you should  discuss your bleeding with your health care provider.
	Bleeding after menopause—After you stop  having menstrual periods, any vaginal bleeding is considered  abnormal and must be discussed with your health care provider.

What Causes Abnormal Uterine Bleeding?
There are many causes of abnormal uterine bleeding, including the  following:

	Pregnancy-related causes—Some women  experience vaginal bleeding early in their pregnancies, even when the  pregnancy is normal. Sometimes vaginal bleeding can signal important  problems, such as a miscarriage or an ectopic (tubal) pregnancy. Always  tell your health care provider if you have bleeding while you are  pregnant.
	Reproductive tract problems—Uterine  fibroids and polyps (growths) or infections are common causes of  abnormal bleeding. Precancer or cancer in the uterus, cervix (opening of  the uterus), or vagina can also cause abnormal bleeding.
	Medical conditions—Obesity, thyroid  problems, blood clotting problems, and liver disease can all contribute  to abnormal bleeding.
	Medications—Many medications, including  over-the-counter drugs and herbal remedies, can cause abnormal bleeding.  In particular, hormones, psychiatric (mental health) drugs, and blood  thinners are associated with abnormal bleeding. Birth control methods  such as pills, implants, shots, and intrauterine devices (IUDs) can also  cause a change in your bleeding.
	Dysfunctional uterine bleeding—When no  cause can be found for abnormal bleeding, it is called dysfunctional  uterine bleeding.

Medical Treatments for Abnormal Uterine  Bleeding

	Combined hormonal contraceptive (birth  control) methods—Combined contraceptive methods contain synthetic forms  of the hormones estrogen and progesterone. They come in pills, a vaginal  ring, and a patch, and can decrease the amount of bleeding in many  women.
	Progestins—Progestins are a synthetic  form of the hormone progesterone that can be taken as pills or placed in  the uterus as an IUD.
	Intrauterine device—The IUD called  Mirena is often used to treat abnormal bleeding. The IUD is placed in  the uterus through the vagina during an office visit. The progestin in  the Mirena IUD helps decrease the amount of bleeding from the  endometrium (uterine lining) and may make your periods stop completely.
	Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory  drugs—These kinds of medications include drugs like ibuprofen (Advil or  Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve). Although aspirin is included in this  category of drugs, women with heavy menstrual bleeding should not use  aspirin.
	Other medications—Other medications that  are less commonly used to treat abnormal uterine bleeding include  gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (sometimes called GnRH  agonists), danazol, and antifibrinolytic medications.

Surgical Treatments for Abnormal Uterine  Bleeding

	Endometrial ablation—This procedure  removes or destroys layers of the endometrium without removing the  uterus and can be done as an office procedure. It usually reduces the  amount of bleeding. This procedure is only appropriate for women who do  not want to have more or any children.
	Fibroid-specific procedures—There are a  number of procedures that can be used to remove or shrink the size of  uterine fibroids:

	 Myomectomy—Myomectomy is the surgical removal of the fibroid  through an incision (cut) in the uterus, while leaving the uterus in  place.
	 Myolysis—Myolysis involves destroying the fibroid using heat,  laser, or freezing.
	 Resection—Resection cuts away a fibroid in the uterine cavity  using an instrument that goes through the cervix and does not require a  uterine incision.
	 Uterine artery embolization—Uterine artery embolization  involves injecting small particles into the blood supply of the uterus  to block the blood vessels that supply uterine fibroids.


	Hysterectomy—Hysterectomy is removal of  the uterus. It is often used to treat the problems that cause abnormal  bleeding, such as uterine fibroids. Hysterectomy is major surgery, and a  woman can no longer get pregnant afterwards.
	Dilatation and curettage (D&amp;C)—A  D&amp;C may be done for a woman with heavy bleeding. In this procedure,  the cervix is dilated and the top layer of the endometrium where the  bleeding is coming from is gently scraped away. Usually a woman is given  general anesthesia (put to sleep) for a D&amp;C, but she can go home  the same day.

How Do I Keep Track of My Menstrual  Bleeding?
A menstrual diary is the best way to keep track of when, how long,  and how much you bleed. Your provider may provide these diaries for you,  or you can download one at www.midwife.org/share_with_women.cfm.